# Analytics Master's Research Project DATA 698

# Credit Fraud Detection and the Introduction of the EMV Chip

The United States has recently implemented EMV chips in most common credit and debit cards, comparable the standard set by European countries. EMV chips are said to be an improvement over the traditional strip and signature design. The strips used on prior cards are unchanging, reproducible, and able to be used in multiple transactions. Chips produce a unique and dynamic transaction code at the point of each sale, which makes duplication and reuse significantly more difficult. There are opposing viewpoints that a stronger physical security leads to an increase in “card-not-present” fraud. This can be supported by looking at the introduction of EMV chips in countries like Britain. 

The goal of the study is primarily to identify the ways in which fraud is detected, how EMV chips affect those ways, and gaining an understanding of how the main methods (logistic models, neural networks, decision trees, and Bayesian networks) coexist to provide a reliable detection model. The United States is in the early stages of widespread use of EMV chips, meaning that other countries’ experiences can be used to identify likely problems and areas of improvement. My secondary aim is to research potential new routes of fraud once chips are in use. Measuring success in the quantitative portion of the project is simple. An algorithm that properly identifies fraudulent charges to a reasonable degree is a success. The qualitative success of the project is more subjective, and can be judged on both the breadth and depth of the information provided to answering the main and secondary objectives.
